# Summary

This unit discussed monotonicity as an abstract yet very important aspect of natural language.
Monotonicity is a mathematical property of functions and breaks down into two distinct notions.

\begin{definition}
Let $f: S \rightarrow T$ be a function from $S$ to $T$.
Assume that $\leq_S$ is an ordering of elements of $S$, whereas $\leq_T$ is an ordering of the elements of $T$.
Then $f$ is <b>monotonically increasing</b> (or <b>isotonic</b>) iff $x \leq_S y$ implies $f(x) \leq_T f(y)$.
\end{definition}

\begin{definition}
Let $f$, $S$, $T$, $\leq_S$, and $\leq_T$ be as before.
Then $f$ is <b>monotonically decreasing</b> (or <b>antitonic</b>) iff $x \leq_S y$ implies $f(x) \geq_T f(y)$.
\end{definition}

Monotonicity is only of interest if the domain and co-domain of a function aren't just flat sets but have additional structure that puts the elements into an order.
A monotonically increasing function preserves order, a monotonically decreasing function reverses it.
The structure may be a poset, a join semilattice, a meet semilattice, or a lattice.

Various phenomena can be analyzed as involving monotonicity:

- the No-Crossing Branches constraint in Autosegmental Phonology,
- morphological syncretism (adjectival gradation, person pronouns, case), and
- NPI licensing based on left/right downward entailment, and
- the crosslinguistic typology of the Person Case Constraint, and
- the Adjunct island Constraint, and
- the learning of SL grammars, and
- many more that we didn't have time to discuss.

Monotonicity thus seems to permeate all aspects of language, from phonology and morphology to syntax, semantics, and even learning.
It is a formal universal that can be combined with substantive universals (e.g. person hierarchies, adjunct algebras) to reduce overgeneration.
It adds a new facet to our formal understanding.
While a purely computational approach often fails to distinguish the linguistically natural from the unnatural, the combination of monotonicity and substantive universals can often capture the relevant distinction.
