# Order relations

A binary relation $R$ that only connects elements of some fixed set $S$ is also called an **order** over $S$.
In this case, $S$ with the relation $R$ over it is called an **ordered set**.

\begin{example}
The prototypical example of an order is the "equal or less than" relation $\leq$ over the set $\mathbb{N}$ of natural numbers.
While the set of natural numbers is unordered, we can use $\leq$ to define the usual order over it with $0$ at the beginning, followed by $1$, which is followed by $2$, and so on.
\end{example}

\begin{example}
We could have defined a very different kind of order over $\mathbb{N}$.
Let $f$ be a function that maps each natural number $x$ to the sum of its digits.
For instance, $f(537) = 5 + 3 + 7 = 15$.
Note that $f(537) = f(357) = f(753) = f(861) = f(96)$, so many different numbers have the same sum of digits.
Now we define an order $R$ such that $x \mathrel{R} y$ iff $f(x) \leq f(y)$.
That's a very different way of ordering the natural numbers, but it's still an order.
\end{example}

\begin{example}
The standard way of reciting the alphabet in English can be regarded as an order on the set $\setof{a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h,i,j,k,l,m,n,o,p,q,r,s,t,u,v,w,x,y,z}$.
\end{example}

## Two important types of orders

There are numerous types of orders.
Two of the most important ones are **total orders** and **partial orders**.
Total orders are also called **linear orders**, which conveys the essential intuition behind them: a relation is a total order if it can be represented by writing all elements in a single line.
A weak partial order is more flexible and allows some elements to be unordered with respect to each other.

Each type of relation is characterized by several properties.

\begin{definition}
A weak partial order is an ordering relation that is

<ol>
<li>transitive, and</li>
<li>reflexive, and</li>
<li>antisymmetric.</li>
</ol>
\end{definition}

\begin{definition}
A linear order is a weak partial order that is total.
\end{definition}

These properties are explained below.

## Transitivity

Suppose you have some set of objects with a relation defined over them.
For example, we may have the set of natural numbers with the *strictly less than* relation $<$.
We can think of these as structures where the set specifies the collection of building blocks and the relation connects these building blocks, putting them into a particular structural configuration.
Suppose we have some structure along those lines, consisting of a set $D$ and a relation $R$.
We can move through this structure with $R$: if we are at $a \in D$, we can move to any $b$ such that $a \mathrel{R} b$.
And from $b$, we can move on to any $c$ such that $b R c$, and so on.

\begin{example}
From the natural number $5$, we can move to $17$ via $\leq$, and from there to $329$.
\end{example}

Some relations are such that whatever can be reached in two steps can also be reached in one step.
So $a R b$ and $b R c$ entail that we also have $a R c$ --- the ability to move from $a$ to $c$ via $b$ implies that we can move directly from $a$ to $c$ without a stop at $b$.
Such relations are called *transitive*.

\begin{definition}
A relation $R$ is *transitive* iff for all $a,b,c \in D$ it holds that $a \mathrel{R} b$ and $b \mathrel{R} c$ jointly imply $a \mathrel{R} c$.
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
The ancestor relation $A$ is transitive.
Your mother is one of your ancestors, and every ancestor of your mother is an ancestor of yourself.
So $a \mathrel{A} b$ and $b \mathrel{A} c$ imply $a \mathrel{A} c$.

<br>
However, the sibling relation $S$ is not transitive.
That's because when $a$ and $b$ are siblings, we have $a \mathrel{S} b$ and $b \mathrel{S} a$, but we do not have $a \mathrel{S} a$ because nobody can be their own sibling.

<br>
Many other relations are not transitive, either.
The parent-of relation is not transitive, because there can be $a$, $b$, and $c$ such that $a$ is the parent of $b$, $b$ is the parent of $c$, but $a$ is not the parent of $c$.
In fact, that is how things are supposed to go in the real world and every deviation from this case is very problematic.

Sometimes a relation may partially meet the requirements of transitivity, but not for all elements of the domain.
For example, you may love your parents, your parents love their parents, and you love your grandparents.
So this is a case where we have $a \mathrel{R} b$, $b \mathrel{R} c$, and $a \mathrel{R} c$.
But obviously love is not a transitive relation --- it is perfectly possible for a person you love to love somebody that you do not love at all.
This shows that a relation is transitive only if there isn't even a single counterexample to transitivity.
\end{example}

Note that transitivity also implies the stronger property that if a node can be reached in finitely many steps, it can also be reached in one step.
This follows by iterated invocation of transitivity.
Suppose that $a \mathrel{R} b$, $b \mathrel{R} c$, and $c \mathrel{R} d$.
This is shown pictorially below.

\input_mid{./transitivity1.tikz}

Then by transitivity, we also have $a \mathrel{R} c$.

\input_mid{./transitivity2.tikz}

But then, again by transitivity, we must also have $a \mathrel{R} d$ because of $a \mathrel{R} c$ and $c \mathrel{R} d$.

\input_mid{./transitivity3.tikz}

Since we can apply the same argument over and over again, anything that can be reached with a finite number of steps can also be reached in a single step.

It is also important to keep in mind that some relations can be trivially transitive, such as the relation below.
Here there are no $a$, $b$, and $c$ such that we have both $a R b$ and $b R c$, so transitivity holds trivially because we cannot produce any counterexample to the claim that the relation is transitive.

\input_large{./transitivity_trivial.tikz}

Nor does transitivity imply that we can reach every node from every other node with a single step.
Nodes may still be unreachable from certain positions.
In the natural numbers, for example, $\leq$ is transitive, yet it does not allow us to reach $5$ from $8$.


## Reflexivity

Another important property is reflexivity, which states that each node is related to itself.
In pictorial terms, this means that there is a loop from a node back to itself.
If every node has such a loop, the relation is *reflexive*.

\begin{definition}
Let $R$ be an order over $D$.
Then $R$ is **reflexive** iff $a \mathrel{R} a$ for all $a \in D$.
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
The parent-of relation is not reflexive because nobody can be their own parent.
But $\leq$ is reflexive because $x \leq x$ for every number $x$.
\end{example}

## Antisymmetry

Antisymmetry means that the relation allows for no cycles except those created by reflexivity.
Or in other words, a relation is antisymmetric if it avoids as much symmetry as possible without losing reflexivity.

\begin{definition}
Let $R$ be a relation over $D$.
Then $R$ is *antisymmetric* iff $a R b$ and $b R a$ joinlty imply $a = b$ for all $a, b \in D$.
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
The sibling relation is not antisymmetric.
That John is a sibling of Mary and Mary is a sibling of John does not entail that John and Mary are the same person.

<br>
But $\leq$ is antisymmetric since $x \leq y$ and $y \leq x$ cannot both be true unless $x = y$.

<br>
Curiously, $<$ is also antisymmetric because there are no $x$ and $y$ such that $x < y$ and $y < x$ both hold.
\end{example}

## Totality

A relation is **total** iff all nodes are related to each other.
Pictorially, there has to be some line between any two given nodes. 
This also requires every node to have a loop from itself to itself.
So totality implies reflexivity.

\begin{definition}
A relation $R$ over set $D$ is **total** iff $a \mathrel{R} b$ or $b \mathrel{R} a$ holds for all $a, b \in D$.
\end{definition}

\begin{exercise}
Indicate in the table below which properties hold of the relations.
\end{exercise}

| Relation                      | Transitive | Reflexive | Antisymmetric | Total | 
| :--                           | :--        | :--       | :--           | :--   | 
| substring                     |            |           |               |       |
| $\subsetneq$                  |            |           |               |       | 
| alphabetical order            |            |           |               |       | 
| ordering all humans by height |            |           |               |       | 

\begin{exercise}
Give a real-world example of a weak partial order that is not a total order.
\end{exercise}
