# Weak order relations

Antisymmetry means that the relation allows for no cycles except those created by reflexivity.
Or in other words, a relation is antisymmetric if it avoids as much symmetry as possible without losing reflexivity.

\begin{definition}
Let $R$ be a relation over $D$.
Then $R$ is *antisymmetric* iff $a R b$ and $b R a$ jointly imply $a = b$ for all $a, b \in D$.
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
The sibling relation is not antisymmetric.
That John is a sibling of Mary and Mary is a sibling of John does not entail that John and Mary are the same person.

<br>
But $\leq$ is antisymmetric since $x \leq y$ and $y \leq x$ cannot both be true unless $x = y$.

<br>
Curiously, $<$ is also antisymmetric because there are no $x$ and $y$ such that $x < y$ and $y < x$ both hold.
\end{example}

## Totality

A relation is **total** iff all nodes are related to each other.
Pictorially, there has to be some line between any two given nodes. 
This also requires every node to have a loop from itself to itself.
So totality implies reflexivity.

\begin{definition}
A relation $R$ over set $D$ is **total** iff $a \mathrel{R} b$ or $b \mathrel{R} a$ holds for all $a, b \in D$.
\end{definition}

\begin{exercise}
Indicate in the table below which properties hold of the relations.
\end{exercise}

| Relation                      | Transitive | Reflexive | Antisymmetric | Total | 
| :--                           | :--        | :--       | :--           | :--   | 
| substring                     |            |           |               |       |
| $\subsetneq$                  |            |           |               |       | 
| alphabetical order            |            |           |               |       | 
| ordering all humans by height |            |           |               |       | 

\begin{exercise}
Give a real-world example of a weak partial order that is not a total order.
\end{exercise}
