**Prerequisites**

- sets (notation)
- strings (basic notation)

# Formal definition and proof of the normal form theorem

The previous two sections introduced negative $n$-gram grammars at great length and showed a basic normal form theorem: for every grammar with $n$-grams of mixed length, there is an equivalent grammar where all $n$-grams have the same length.
The presentation was deliberately informal to focus on intuitions rather than mathematical rigor.
This unit is very different.
It gives the definitions in a mathematical format, rigorously states the normal form theorem, and states the proof of the theorem in a more standard mathematical style.

I admit that this might be a lot to take in for the newbie, but it is important for you to learn how to read mathematical notation.
It really makes things a lot easier in the long run.
Once you feel more comfortable with mathematical notation, I suggest that you come back to this unit and contrast it to the two preceding ones.
Which one gives you more information in a short amount of time?

If you're suffering an acute case of symbol shock, don't worry.
We will continue at a leisurely pace, with optional formal sections sprinkled in to give a succinct summary of the more informal sections.

## Formal definition of negative grammars

\begin{definition}
Let $\Sigma$ be some alphabet, and $\Sigma_\$$ its extension with a distinguished edge marker symbol $\$$.
An $n$-gram over $\Sigma_\$$ is an element of $\Sigma_\$^n$ ($n \geq 1$).
A **negative $n$-gram grammar** $G$ over alphabet $\Sigma$ is a finite set of $n$-grams over $\Sigma_\$$.
A string $s$ over $\Sigma$ is well-formed with respect to $G$ iff there are no $u, v$ over $\Sigma_\$$ and no $g \in G$ such that
$ \$^{n-1} \stringcat s \stringcat \$^{n-1} = u \stringcat g \stringcat v$.
The **language of $G$**, denoted $L(G)$, contains all strings that are well-formed with respect to $G$, and only those.
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
Suppose $\Sigma \is \setof{C, V}$.
One string over $\Sigma$ is $\mathit{CVCVCV}$, an instance of a very simple CV-syllable template.
Assume $G$ contains $\mathit{CC}$ and $\mathit{VC}$.
The first bigram is not a problem since there are no strings $u$ and $v$ such that $\$\mathit{CVCV}\$ = u \stringcat \mathit{CC} \stringcat v$.
But clearly $\$\mathit{CVCV}\$ = \$\mathit{C} \stringcat \mathit{VC} \stringcat \mathit{V}\$$.
So $\mathit{CV}$ is a component of $\mathit{CVCV}$, and the string is ruled out by $G$.
\end{example}

\begin{definition}
A **mixed negative $n$-gram grammar** $G$ is a finite set of strings over $\Sigma$ such that $n$ is the length of the longest string in $G$.
A negative $n$-gram grammar that is not mixed is called **strict**.
\end{definition}

## Normal form theorem

\begin{theorem}
For every mixed negative $n$-gram grammar $G$, there is a strict negative $n$-gram grammar $G'$ such that $L(G) = L(G')$.
\end{theorem}

\begin{proof}
Let $G' \is \setof{ u \stringcat g \stringcat v \mid g \in G, u,v \in \Sigma^*, \text{ and the length of } u \stringcat g \stringcat v \text{ is } n}$.
Suppose $s \notin L(G)$.
Then there must be some $g \in G$ and $u = u_1 \stringcat u_2$ and $v = v_1 \stringcat v_2$ over $\Sigma$ such that $\$^{n-1} \stringcat s \stringcat \$^{n-1} = u \stringcat g \stringcat v$.
But then $\$^{n-1} \stringcat s \stringcat \$^{n-1} = u_1 \stringcat u_2 \stringcat g \stringcat v_1 \stringcat v_2$.
As the length of $\$^{n-1} \stringcat s \stringcat \$^{n-1}$ exceeds $n$, it holds that $u_2 \stringcat g \stringcat v_1 \in G'$ for some choice of $u_2$ and $v_1$.
But then $s \notin L(G')$.

In the other direction, suppose $s \notin L(G')$.
Then there is some $g \in G'$ such that $ \$^{n-1} \stringcat s \stringcat \$^{n-1} = u \stringcat g \stringcat v$.
But then there must $u'$, $g'$ and $v'$ over $\Sigma$ such that $g = u' \stringcat g' \stringcat v'$ and $g' \in G$.
It follows that $s \notin L(G)$.
\end{proof}
