# Summary

This unit introduced $n$-grams as a fundamental concepts of computational and theoretical linguistics alike.

- A negative $n$-gram grammar is a set of $n$-grams.
    - A string is well-formed iff it does not contain any forbidden $n$-grams.
    - An $n$-gram grammar is fixed if all $n$-grams have the same length, and mixed otherwise.
- Every negative $n$-gram grammar has an equivalent positive $n$-gram grammar, and the other way round.
- Positive grammars must be fixed.
- Multiple grammars can be combined into a single grammar.
    - Negative grammars: union of sets
    - Positive grammars: intersection of sets
- Whereas an $n$-gram grammar is a set, a bag-of-words model is a multiset.
    - The multiset counts for each word type its number of word tokens.
    - Multiset sum and scalar multiplication can be used to combine and modify counts.
- Due to Zipf's law, a small number of words make up the majority of each text.
- The function $\mathrm{del}_S$ removes all stop words.
- Mathematically, this is the same as constructing phonological tiers.
- Tiers make it possible to handle long-distance dependencies in an elegant fashion with much smaller grammars.

## Some additional terminology

We now have two types of $n$-gram grammars: those that regulate strings, and those that regulate tiers.
The former are commonly referred to as **strictly local** (SL) grammars, whereas the latter are **tier-based strictly local** (TSL).
A TSL grammar consists of both an SL grammar $G$ and a set $T$ of tier symbols.
A string $s$ is well-formed with respect to the TSL grammar iff $\mathrm{del}_{^+T}(s)$ is well-formed with respect to $G$.

By default SL and TSL grammars are negative, but positive counterparts can be defined as usual.
