**Prerequisites**

- sets (notation, operations)

# Comparing sets

Two sets can stand in several distinct relations to each other:

1. subset
1. superset
1. identity
1. proper subset
1. proper superset
1. disjoint
1. incomparable


## Subset and superset

Given two sets $A$ and $B$, $A$ is a **subset** of $B$ iff every element of $A$ is also an element of $B$.
In this case, one writes $A \subseteq B$.
For example, $\setof{a,b} \subseteq \setof{a,b,c,d}$.
Alternatively, one also says in this case that $B$ is a **superset** of $A$ (written $B \supseteq A$).

\begin{example}
    A transitive verb is a verb that occurs with a subject and an object: <i>devour</i>, <i>contradict</i>, <i>wager</i>, <i>flummox</i>, and many more.
    Not all verbs are transitive, e.g. <i>sleep</i> or <i>give</i>. 
    Suppse $T$ is the set of all English transitive verbs, whereas $V$ is the set of all English verbs.
    Since every transitive verb is a verb, but no the other way round, we have $T \subseteq V$.
\end{example}

By the definition of subset, every set $S$ is a subset of itself.
The reasoning is simple.
If $S \subseteq S$, then every member of $S$ must be a member of $S$, which is obviously true (how could it be otherwise?).

In addition, the empty set is a subset of every set, including itself.
This is because the empty set contains no elements at all, so it trivially holds that every member of the empty set is a member of every set.

\begin{exercise}
Complete the table below.
You can use the Python code to help you with this.
\end{exercise}

| A             | B                 | $A \subseteq B$? | $A \supseteq B$? | 
| :--           | :--               | :--              | :--              | 
| $\setof{a,b}$ | $\setof{a,a,b,c}$ |                  |                  | 
| $\setof{a}$   | $\setof{b}$       |                  |                  | 
| $\setof{}$    | $\setof{a}$       |                  |                  | 
| $\setof{a,b}$ | $\setof{a,a,b,b}$ |                  |                  | 


```python
def set_print(some_set):
    return '{' + ', '.join(sorted(list(some_set))) + '}'

# adapt the sets as necessary
set1 = set(['a', 'b'])
set2 = set(['a', 'a', 'b', 'c'])

if set1.issubset(set2):
    print(set_print(set1), "is a subset of", set_print(set2))
else:
    print(set_print(set1), "is not a subset of", set_print(set2))
```

\begin{exercise}
Say whether the following statement is true or false and justify your answer:
for any two sets $A$ and $B$, $A \subseteq B$ iff $A \cap B = A$.
\end{exercise}

## Identity

Two sets are *identical* iff each one is a subset of the other.
In formal terms, $A = B$ iff both $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq A$ hold.
The reason for this is again simple:

1.  If two sets $A$ and $B$ are identical, then they must contain exactly the same elements.
    But then every member of $A$ is a member of $B$, which implies $A \subseteq B$.
    And it's also the case that every member of $B$ is a member of $A$, so that we have $B \subseteq A$, too.

1.  In the other direction, if $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq A$, then every member of $A$ is a member of $B$, and every member of $B$ is a member of $A$.
    But that can only happen if the sets are identical.


## Proper subset and superset

We call $A$ a **proper subset** of $B$ ($A \subsetneq B$) iff $A$ is a subset of $B$ but $A$ and $B$ are not identical.
In other words, every element of $A$ is a member of $B$, but not every element of $B$ is a member of $A$.
We also say that $B$ is a **proper superset** of $A$ ($B \supsetneq A$).

\begin{example}
    Given our previous discussion, the set $T$ of transitive verbs is proper subset of the set $V$ of verbs because it is a subset but not every verb is a transitivie verb.
    In other words, $T \subseteq V$ yet $T \neq V$.
    Hence $T \subsetneq V$.
\end{example}

\begin{exercise}
Fill in $=$, $\subsetneq$, or $\supsetneq$ as appropriate.

<ol>
<li>$\setof{a,b} \_ \setof{a}$</li>
<li>$\setof{a,a,b,c} \_ \setof{b,b,a,c}$</li>
<li>$\setof{1,2,3} \_ \setof{n + 5 \mid n \in \setof{-4, -3}}$</li>
<li>$\emptyset \_ \setof{a}$</li>
<li>$\emptyset \_ \setof{\emptyset}$</li>
</ol>
\end{exercise}

## Disjoint and incomparable sets

If there are two sets $A$ and $B$ such that neither $A \subseteq B$ nor $B \subseteq A$, then there can be only two scenarios.
One option is that $A$ and $B$ are **disjoint**, which means that there is no $x$ such that both $x \in A$ and $x \in B$ --- the two sets have absolutely no overlap.
In mathematical terms, $A \cap B = \emptyset$.
Alternatively, $A$ and $B$ might be **incomparable**.
In this case the two sets have a limited overlap such that there is at least one $x$ with both $x \in A$ and $x \in B$, but there are also $a \in A$ and $b \in B$ such that $a \notin B$ and $b \notin A$.

\begin{example}
The set of English prepositions (<i>on</i>, <i>to</i>, <i>at</i>, ...) and the set of English determiners (<i>a</i>, <i>the</i>, <i>this</i>, ...) have not a single word in common and thus are disjoint.
The set of English verbs and the set of English nouns, on the other hand, are incomparable.
Many words like <i>water</i>, <i>cut</i>, <i>fall</i>, <i>love</i>, <i>try</i>, <i>judge</i>, <i>beat</i>, or <i>cross</i> can be used as nouns or verbs, but many other words are used only as nouns (<i>tree</i>, <i>waterfall</i>, <i>idea</i>, <i>Ferrari</i>) or only as verbs (<i>write</i>, <i>convince</i>, <i>admonish</i>).
\end{example}

Remember that it is possible for both $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq A$ to be true --- in this case, $A = B$.
But there can be no $A$ and $B$ such that $A \subsetneq B$ and $B \subsetneq A$.

\begin{exercise}
For each line in the table, say whether the sets are disjoint, incomparable, identical, or stand in a proper subset/superset relation.
\end{exercise}

| A               | B                                                 | 
| :--             | :--                                               | 
| $\setof{2,5,8}$ | the set of all odd numbers                        | 
| $\setof{a,b,c}$ | $\setof{a,b} \cup (\setof{a,c} - \setof{b,d})$    | 
| $\emptyset$     | $\setof{a,b} \cap (\setof{a,c} - \setof{b,d})$    | 
| $\emptyset$     | $\setof{a,b} \cap (\setof{a,c} \cap \setof{b,d})$ | 

## Remarks on notation

### Similarity to $\leq$ and $\geq$

Students sometimes confuse the symbols $\subseteq$ and $\supseteq$.
To avoid that, just keep in mind that these symbols are modeled after $\leq$ and $\geq$ for numbers.
Just like $x \leq y$ means that $x$ is at most as large as $y$, $x \subseteq y$ tells us that $x$ contains at most all the elements of $y$, and nothing else.

### A note on $\subset$

You may occasionally come across the symbol $\subset$ in other math texts.
Some authors use $\subset$ instead of $\subseteq$, while others use it for $\subsetneq$.
As you might imagine, this can be very confusing for the reader, so it's best to avoid $\subset$ and use $\subseteq$ and $\subsetneq$ instead.

### And then there's $\not\subseteq$

Sometimes we might just want to say that $A$ is not a subset of $B$.
We could paraphrase this, as in "it is not the case that $A \subseteq B$".
But mathematicians like to use symbols for common phrases, so there's a dedicated symbol for this: $\not\subseteq$.
Careful, do not confuse $\not\subseteq$ with $\subsetneq$.

Here's an overview of all the relevant notation:

| **Formula**         | **means...**                                                                 |
| :-:                 | :--                                                                          |
| $A \subseteq B$     | $A$ is a subset of $B$ (holds even if $A = B$)                               |
| $A \subsetneq B$    | $A$ is a proper subset of $B$ ($A \subseteq B$ and $A \neq B$)               |
| $A \not\subseteq B$ | $A$ is not a subset of $B$ ($A \ni a \notin B$ for some $a$) |

As you might have expected, there's corresponding counterparts for superset: $\supseteq$, $\supsetneq$, $\not\supseteq$.
But there is no standardized symbol for sets being incomparable, although some authors like to use $\sim$ for this purpose.

## Recap

\begin{definition}
Let $A$ and $B$ be arbitrary sets.
Then $A$ is a <b>subset</b> of $B$ ($A \subseteq B$) iff every member of $A$ is a member of $B$.
In this case, $B$ is a <b>superset</b> of $A$ ($B \supseteq A$).
\end{definition}

\begin{definition}
For $A$ and $B$ arbitrary sets, $A$ is a <b>proper subset</b> of $B$ ($A \subsetneq B$) iff $A \subseteq B$ and there is a $b \in B$ such that $b \notin A$.
Similarly, $B$ is a <b>proper superset</b> of $A$ ($B \supsetneq A$).
\end{definition}

\begin{definition}
Let $A$ and $B$ be arbitrary sets.
Then $A$ and $B$ are:

<ul>
<li><b>identical</b> iff $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq A$ both hold,</li>
<li><b>disjoint</b> iff $A \cap B = \emptyset$,</li>
<li><b>incomparable</b> iff $A \not\subseteq B$ and $B \not\subseteq A$ and $A \cap B \neq \emptyset$.</li>
</ul>
\end{definition}
