# The Powerset

Sometimes it is useful to take a set and consider all sets one could build from its elements.
For example, each one of the following sets can be built form the elements of $\setof{1,2,3}$: 

1. $\emptyset$
1. $\setof{1}$
1. $\setof{2}$
1. $\setof{3}$
1. $\setof{1,2}$
1. $\setof{1,3}$
1. $\setof{2,3}$
1. $\setof{1,2,3}$

Note that each one of the sets in this list is a subset of $\setof{1,2,3}$, and every subset of $\setof{1,2,3}$ is on this list.
So the above is the list of all subsets of $\setof{1,2,3}$.
The set of all these sets is called the *powerset* of $\setof{1,2,3}$.

\begin{definition}
    For $A$ a set, the *powerset* of $A$ is $\wp(A) \is \setof{ S \mid S \subseteq A }$.
\end{definition}

There are many alternative notations for the powerset.
A particularly common one is $2^A$ as it highlights two interesting aspects of the powerset.
First, we define the *cardinality* of a set $A$ as the number of elements it contains, and we denote it by $\card{A}$.
For example, $\card{\setof{1,2,3}} = 3$.
Now we can state a universal truth for the cardinality of powersets.

\begin{theorem}
    For every set $A$ with $\card{A} = n$, it holds that $\card{\wp(A)} = \card{2^A} = 2^\card{A} = 2^n$.
\end{theorem}

This is witnessed by our example set $\setof{1,2,3}$, the powerset of which has $8$ members (see the list above).
Feel free to compute the powerset of $\setof{1,2}$ and $\setof{1,2,3,4}$, you will see that they have $4$ and $16$ members, respectively.

But the $2^A$ notation for powersets has a deeper meaning that goes beyond mere numbers.
The notation $B^A$ is sometimes used to represent the set of all functions from $A$ to $B$.
And $2$ can be construed not just as the number $2$, but as any set with cardinality $2$, including $\setof{\top, \bot}$.
So $2^A$ can be taken to denote the set of all functions from $A$ to $\setof{\top, \bot}$.
But since functions are sets, this is exactly the class of all subsets of $A$.

In sum, the $2^A$ notation for powersets is very pleasing on a theoretical level.
But humans are a practical bunch, and since superscripts are slightly strenuous to read, $\wp(A)$ is the preferred notation for powersets.
